***************
Getting started
***************

Welcome to The Pencil Code documentation page! To help you get started, here are a few tips for using and contributing to this space:

Using the documentation
=======================

The purpose of this space is to bring together The Pencil Code documentation
in a unified format and organized in a logical, hierarchical structure.
The ultimate goal is to make the process of locating and reading documentation
as easy and enjoyable as possible.

Contributing to the documentation
=================================

In order to contribute to the documentation, you will need to clone the
GitHub repository containing the source of the documentation, edit the
necessary files, and then push your changes back to the repository. The
documentation will then be built and deployed automatically using  the ReadTheDocs platform.

The following instructions are for Ubuntu systems (64-bit, 16.04+):

Cloning the repository
----------------------


Go to a directory and type in a terminal:

.. code:: bash

   git clone git@github.com:pencil-code/pencil-code.git

If you have  a github username 'MY_GITHUB_NAME' and like to submit changes you can use: 

.. code:: bash

   git clone http://MY_GITHUB_NAME@github.com/pencil-code/pencil-code.git
   git config --global credential.helper 'cache --timeout=3600'
   git config --global branch.autosetuprebase always

After cloning the repository, you can access all the documentation files in the directory:

.. code:: bash

   cd pencil-code/doc/readthedocs

How to build locally (fast)
---------------------------

Follow these instructions to build the reStructuredText documentation (i.e., manuals), but not
the auto-generated code documentation. The build is very fast (few seconds).

1. Make sure you have ``sphinx`` installed and that ``sphinx-build`` is in your ``PATH``.

2. Make sure you have the following ``python3`` scripts installed (e.g., with ``pip3``)::

      sphinx-rtd-theme
      sphinxcontrib-images

3. Build:

   .. code:: bash

      # Fast: do not build auto-generated code documentation
      make fast

   The html files will be built into *_build/html*.

How to build locally (slow)
---------------------------

Follow these instructions to build the complete documentation, including
the auto-generated code documentation. The build is slow (several minutes).

.. warning:: 

   Sphinx imports the entire *Pencil* package in order to generate the documentation (right now, only the *Pencil Python* module. More to come!)

1. Make sure you have ``sphinx`` installed and that ``sphinx-build`` is in your ``PATH``.

2. Make sure you have the following ``python3`` scripts installed (e.g., with ``pip3``)::

      sphinx-rtd-theme
      sphinxcontrib-images
      sphinx-epytext
      sphinx-js

      astropy
      numpy
      scipy

3. Update your local copy of the repository (in order to have freshly autogenerated documentation) and build:

   .. code:: bash

      git pull --rebase

4. Build:

   .. code:: bash

      # Slow: build auto-generated code documentation
      make html

The html files will be built into *_build/html*.

Tips for the Python documentation (numpy style)
-----------------------------------------------

The *Pencil Python* documentation follows the numpy style docstring convention.

For a thorough example please see `the napoleon extension website <https://sphinxcontrib-napoleon.readthedocs.io/en/latest/example_numpy.html>`_.



.. tip::

   To make sure sphinx will be successful in generating the documentation, go to
   the  python directory

   .. code:: bash

      # from the directory containing conf.py
      cd ../../python 
      python 
   
   and try to import
   the ``pencil`` package. If the import succeeds, it is likely
   that sphinx will also succeed.



Tips for the IDL documentation
------------------------------

Not yet available.


Tips for the Fortran documentation
----------------------------------

Not yet available.
