\input texinfo   @c -*-texinfo-*-

@c %**start of header

@setfilename manual
@settitle Installing and Using the MHD Code
@setchapternewpage odd

@c Merge all indices into one:
@syncodeindex vr cp
@syncodeindex fn cp

@c %**end of header

@ifinfo
This file documents the basic usage of the MHD code.

Copyright 2002 Axel Brandenburg & Wolfgang Dobler

Permission is granted to ... (?)
@end ifinfo

@titlepage
@title Installing and Using the MHD Code
@subtitle A very preliminary manual
@author Axel Brandenburg & Wolfgang Dobler

@page
@vskip 0pt plus 1filll
Copyright @copyright{} 2002 Axel Brandenburg & Wolfgang Dobler

Published by ... [nobody]

Permission is granted to ... (?)
@end titlepage

@node Top, Overview, , (dir)

@ifinfo
This document describes how to set up and get started with the MHD code.

This document applies to the current version of the code, but is likely to
never be quite up-to-date.
@end ifinfo

@menu
* Copying::          Your rights and freedoms.
* First Chapter::    Getting the code
* Second Chapter::   Setting the code up
* Third Chapter::    Equations
* Fourth Chapter::   Using the code
@end menu

@node    First Chapter, Second Chapter, top,      top
@comment node-name,     next,           previous, up
@chapter Obtaining the Code
@cindex CVS (obtaining the code)

To obtain the MHD code, you should use CVS (concurrent version system, see
@url{http://fill.this.in}).
You proceed as follows:

@enumerate

@item Get a CVS client from @url{fill this in} and install it

@item Get the password for anonymous CVS access to the MHD code

@item Set your environment variable @env{CVSROOT} (you probably want to
  put this into your @file{.cshrc} or @file{.profile} setup files):
@example
csh>  setenv CVSROOT :pserver:anonymous@@norserv.nordita.dk:/home/brandenb/CVS
[or]
sh>  CVSROOT :pserver:anonymous@@norserv.nordita.dk:/home/brandenb/CVS
sh>  export CVSROOT
@end example

@item Log in:
@example
unix>  cvs login
cvs pasword: ......
@end example

@item Go to wherever you want the code:
@example
unix>  cd @file{somewhere}
@end example

@item Check the code out:
@example
unix>  cvs checkout -d mhd f90/pencil_modular
@end example 
This creates a subdirectory @file{mhd} of your current directory
@file{somewhere} and populates it with the MHD code's subdirectories.

@end enumerate


@chapter The equations
@cindex Equations

The equations solved by the MHD code are basically the standard
compressible MHD equations. However, the modular structure allows to
implement different versions of the MHD equations, as well as to switch
some of the equations off.

@cindex entropy
@cindex thermodynamics
The current thermodynamics module @file{entropy} formulates the thermal
part of the physics in terms of @emph{entropy} @math{$s$}, rather than thermal
energy $e$, which you may be more familiar with.
Thus the two fundamental thermodynamical variables are @math{\ln\varrho}
and @math{s}.
The reason for this choice of variables is that entropy is the natural
physical variable for (at least) convection processes: the sign of the
entropy gradient determines convective (in)stability, the
@emph{Rayleigh number} is proportional to the entropy gradient, etc.



@node Index, Top
@comment    node-name,         next,       previous, up
@unnumbered Index

@printindex cp

@c End of file
