.. social_rules:

***********************
Social rules 
***********************


.. note::

        Adapted from this `github wiki page <https://github.com/pencil-code/pencil-code/wiki/SocialRules>`_

Hi guys,

I discussed with a co-developer of a code that is developed pretty much
like Pencil, open-source, a team, version control, etc. Talking to him
about code development, I asked if there were cases of flame fights or
heated arguments in the code community. He mentioned a couple of cases,
and pointed me to **books** on open source development where such stuff
is discussed. Not surprisingly, it is quite a common occurrence.

Chapter 6 of the first link, from 102 on (“Difficult People”), is
particularly relevant.

`<http://producingoss.com/>`_ 

`<http://artofcommunityonline.org/>`_ 

Wlad.

Good electronic communication
-----------------------------

For an electronic discussion, there is no such thing as a meta-level of
information transfer. Therefore, every good electronic communicator just
stays with the facts. And *if* an interpretation needs to be done, one
chooses the interpretation that assumes *best* motives of your opponent.
Only then, one has a chance to understand the opponent right. And
without understanding an opponent *fully*, one has no right to answer.
(Philippe)


Code of Conduct
---------------

Although spaces may feel informal at times, we want to remind ourselves
that this is a professional space. As such, the Pencil Code community
adheres to a code of conduct adapted from the Contributor Covenant
(`<https://www.contributor-covenant.org/>`_) code of conduct. All
contributors will be required to confirm they have read our 
`code of conduct <https://github.com/pencil-code/pencil-code/blob/master/license/CODE_OF_CONDUCT.md>`_,
and are expected to adhere to it in all Pencil Code spaces and
associated interactions.
